---
layout:     post
title:      Hands-on with Proof Assitants:- Coq and Isabelle 
date:       2017-10-13 12:31:00
summary:    Understanding the role of interactive theorem provers in formal mathematics with an example  
categories: logic
---

Hello there! I recently came across Proof Assistants and was really intrigued by them. While these do not hold mainstream attention as of now, most proof assistants are being used to help solve various research problems in mathematics and computer science. Due to their appreciable benefits, I decided to write this post to lightly touch upon two of them - Coq and Isabelle. Finally, we will be writing a very simple proof in both the languages to see them in action.  

## What are Proof Assistants?
Proof Assistants are software that allow you to translate mathematical proofs into formal proofs which can be then verified by a computer. Therefore, their work extends towards verification of mathematical theorems and an attempt to *formalize* mathematics. As these proof assistants have compilers which read and accept only a particular style of inputs given to them, it could be argued that they are *programming languages*.

## Coq & Isabelle
Coq and Isabelle are an example of one such proof assistant. Without making this explanation too complicated (since I am no expert myself), Coq uses a set of languages (which we will come to later) to understand a proof and verify it. The idea behind Coq and even Isabelle is to be able to break the proof down into some subgoals that each has to be proved. As a result, if each of these subgoals is proved, the end result is that the proof has been verified.

### Installing Coq
I'm assuming you are using some form of Linux, otherwise you may head over [here](http://coq.inria.fr/download) to download it.
- On Ubuntu, running `sudo apt-get install coq` will take care of everything

### Installing Isabelle
Again, if you're not using Linux, head over [here](https://isabelle.in.tum.de/installation.html).
- First run `wget https://isabelle.in.tum.de/dist/Isabelle2017_app.tar.gz`
- Then, `tar -xzf Isabelle2017_app.tar.gz`
- To start up the IDE, run `Isabelle2017/Isabelle2017`
It will take some time to start up the first time!

## Basics of Coq
It would be a good idea to get an understanding of what and how Coq works. There are three types of 
